This report investigates evidence pertaining to the court case of Fanny Farmer. Fanny claims that Dye Hard, LLC supplied her with the wrong dye after ordering Acid Green 50 dye. She believes that the dye color she received did not match the expected color of Acid Green 50. 
Fabric dye can be either reactive or non-reactive. Reactive dyes form new chemical bonds with the fiber, but Fanny uses non-reactive dyes that adhere to the fiber due to intermolecular forces (IMF) in the dye and fiber.
Intermolecular forces are the attractive forces between particles in a molecule caused by electrostatic attractions between positive and negative charges. IMFs are responsible for many physical properties of compounds, such as boiling point and melting point, but they also affect the ability of a dye to adhere to a fabric. Different types of IMFs, with varying degrees of strength, may be present in a molecule. The varying strength of forces combined with the molecule’s structure determines a molecule’s polarity. Polarity is the difference in electron density in a molecule. Electrons in the molecule may be spread unevenly due to an atom with more electrons or a partial charge on an atom either repelling or attracting other electrons.
In general, molecules are attracted to other molecules of similar polarity. Water repels oil because water is polar, and oil is nonpolar. The same principle applies to fabric and dye. The most polar dyes will adhere best to the most polar fabrics. The molecule’s structure can determine the polarity of dye and fabric molecules. The types of bonding between atoms are a good indicator of polarity. Ion-dipole bonding (ion dissolution in water) and hydrogen bonding (hydrogen bonding to nitrogen, oxygen, and fluorine) are both very polar, dipole-dipole bonding (polar molecules interacting with each other) is less polar, and London Dispersion Forces (nonpolar attractions found in all molecules when electron distributions fluctuate) are least polar. From this information, dyes and fabrics can be ranked by polarity (Fig. 1, Fig. 2), and the corresponding fabric/dye that adheres to it can be predicted (Fig. 3). Observing a dye’s bonding ability to different fabrics helps determine the dye’s identity.
